Studies of human variation and its links to disease promise to usher in an era of personalized medicine, where the genetic code of an individual is assessed and used to guide clinical practice. This advance toward individualized medicine is being made possible through the cataloging of common genetic variants and their associations with complex traits and disease.

Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have a central role in this human genetics revolution. The primary purpose of GWAS is to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are associated with phenotypic traits, typically those associated with a particular disease (Figure ​Figure11). In a handful of cases, particularly in cancer, the move to genome wide SNP detection has led to clinically relevant predictions (Jostins and Barrett, 2011). However, despite these best-case-scenarios, nearly half of the disease-associated SNPs from published GWAS are not located in or near genes (Visel et al., 2009; Hindorff et al., 2013). Therefore, despite the fact that significant associations are often found between complex traits and SNPs in gene deserts (i.e., genomic regions of > 500kb that lack annotated genes or protein-coding sequences; Venter et al., 2001; Libioulle et al., 2007; Grant et al., 2009), their location within gene deserts means they have no readily annotated gene function and cannot be assigned to a specific biological pathway. Explanations abound for why apparently significant SNPs are located in gene deserts (Visel et al., 2009; Uddin et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012). However, typically these sorts of results only make their way into publications as part of supplementary tables of findings, often without any attempt to explain the association. Current trends are now shifting to focus on SNPs within gene deserts as potentially contributing to diseases by regulating gene function from a distance.
How is it possible for SNPs within gene deserts to regulate unlinked genes? The answer lies within the twists and turns that form when 3 m of human DNA (chromosomes) is packaged within a roughly spherical nucleus that is only approximately 10 μm in diameter. Within the hierarchy of folding necessary to package the genome within the eukaryotic nucleus, regions of each chromosome contact other chromosomes to form an intricate 3-dimensional DNA network. Therefore, while two regions of DNA (loci) may be distant on a linear scale, DNA folding provides a mechanism for these two loci to become spatially close together. Implicit in this concept is the idea that all genetic functions (regulation, reading, repair, and replication) are influenced by this 3-dimensional architecture, generating the cell’s morphology and function (Misteli, 2001). Intra-cellular DNA structure cannot be divorced from its functions.
